---
title: Hello and Welcome!
date: 2020-06-25
author: Xinke Chen
tags:
  - meta
  - welcome
  - about
---

Hello and welcome to Overthinking Code! As the first post of this blog, let's
kick things  off nice and simple and cover one, who the heck am I, and two, why I
created this blog and the purpose and philosophy for this blog. Between those two things,
you'll get to know a little of who am I, why this blog is called Overthinking Code, and maybe even
why I chose this color palette and this particular font of the text you're
reading right now.

## Who am I
Well, I am [Xinke Chen](/about), the author and webmaster of this blog. As of time of
writing, I am a recent graduate of the University of Pittsburgh. If you care,
I majored in Computer Science (surprising right? 😉) with a minor in Economics.
I am currently working for a large healthcare company (I am on Linkedin).

In more technically oriented details, I have a large breadth of interests and
experiences as one might expect from a half-decent undergraduate education.
Just rattling off the programming languages and technologies I experimented or
played with, in rough chronological order:

- HTML/CSS
- Nginx
- Git
- Objective-C (iOS)
- Java
- Swift (iOS)
- C
- Arduino
- JavaScript
- Express
- VueJS
- MongoDB
- SQL (Oracle/PostgreSQL)
- Docker
- Python
- C++
- ROS
- Nuxt

Now, I will admit that for some of these technologies, I don't have as deep of a knowledge
as I would like and others I definitely would not try marketing myself in, at least
not without a serious review and maybe a project or two. Also, imaginary internet points
to anyone who can figure which technologies were used together for projects. Think
of it as a massive boggle board.

## The Purpose and Philosophy Behind this Blog
So first and foremost, this blog is largely meant as journal for me, albeit
a journal with a heavy technical focus. The implicit hope of this little project is that
by publishing my thoughts to the great void and expanse that is the Internet (or if you
prefer and old enough to remember, the World Wide Web), I actually take the time to spend 
to reflect. At the bare minimum,  think this blog as a reminder for me to take notes on 
potentially useful tools and skills to remember, both technical and non-technical.

### Why "Overthinking Code"?
Speaking of taking notes on useful tools, that brings us to core idea behind this blog,
and to a certain degree the title of this blog. The title of the blog, in a way, reflects
a habit and tendency I have had towards projects, both during during the conception of and
the implementation of. Many of the languages, tools, and frameworks I've picked up are often
borne of my habit of thinking "what if..." about a certain task or subject. In a lot of cases,
alot of the resulting solutions or implementations often to result in implementing things I
don't really need. However, I would argue that more often than not, that asking that question
can result in useful and meaningful insights, or in the bare minimum, picking up something
that will be useful later on. A number of my personal projects would fall under that umbrella.

Was trying to create an iOS Alarm Clock app that fetched traffic and weather data the most useful
and profitable thing in the world? No, but it did give a deeper appreciation of actually reading
documentation and interacting with REST APIs, something that came in really handy later on.
Was creating a contact sharing single page web application exactly novel? No, but the experience
of working with Node and Vue wound up being really useful later on. Lots of the technologies above,
e.g. Docker, C++, PostgreSQL, I experimented with them because I decided that the "what if" would
be interesting to explore and to gain a deeper appreciation of the tools and the problems they tried
to solve, even if in the moment I am regreting my decision from earlier (sidenote: if anyone can
suggest a good and simplified guide to C++ smart pointers and the ownership semantics, I would love to
see it).

These summed up, is why I settled on "Overthinking Code". Plus, and to my great surprise, it did not
hurt that the domain name was still available 😄.

## Welcome Aboard!
So, if you read through all that and some of that resonates with you, I hope you join me and follow
along as I documented the various comings and goings of my journey as a developer. With any luck,
you might be mildly entertained, and hopefully might even learn something.
